>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY AUGUST 6: DONALD
TRUMP LOOKS TOWARD PARTY UNITY
AND ENDORSES FELLOW REPUBLICANS
RYAN, McCAIN AND AYOTTE; IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, IN FLORIDA, A
ONCE THRIVING ECOSYSTEM
STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE.
>> TODAY, WE HAVE UPWARDS OF
600,000 SEPTIC TANKS LEACHING
INTO TIDAL CREEKS AND CANALS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, THE LESSER-
KNOWN OPIOID AT THE CENTER OF A
GROWING CRISIS OF OVERDOSE
DEATHS.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN AN EFFORT TO RESTORE PARTY
UNITY, LAST NIGHT, REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE DONALD
TRUMP ENDORSED HOUSE SPEAKER
PAUL RYAN IN HIS PRIMARY RACE
THIS COMING TUESDAY.
TRUMP HAD PREVIOUSLY HESITATED
TO BACK THE SPEAKER AND SEVERAL
OTHER HIGH-PROFILE REPUBLICANS,
BUT, AFTER A ROUGH WEEK IN THE
POLLS, HE CALLED FOR A RETURN TO
THE REAGAN-ERA "BIG TENT"
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
>> I SUPPORT AND ENDORSE OUR
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, PAUL RYAN.
WE MAY DISAGREE ON A COUPLE OF
THINGS, BUT, WE MOSTLY AGREE,
AND WE'RE GOING TO GET IT DONE,
AND WE'RE GOING TO DO A LOT OF
WONDERFUL THINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING THE RALLY
IN RYAN'S HOME STATE OF
WISCONSIN, TRUMP ALSO ENDORSED
THE RE-ELECTION CAMPAIGNS OF
SENATORS JOHN McCAIN IN ARIZONA
AND KELLY AYOTTE IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE, AND SOFTENED
CONTROVERSIAL COMMENTS HE MADE
LAST YEAR ABOUT SENATOR McCAIN'S
MILITARY SERVICE AND YEARS AS A
PRISONER OF WAR IN VIETNAM.
>> I HOLD IN THE HIGHEST ESTEEM,
SENATOR JOHN McCAIN, FOR HIS
SERVICE TO OUR COUNTRY, IN
UNIFORM AND IN PUBLIC OFFICE.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN AS TRUMP
TRIED TO MAKE AMENDS WITH FELLOW
REPUBLICANS, HE TURNED UP THE
ATTACKS ON HIS OPPONENT, HILLARY
CLINTON, CALLING HER, IN HIS
WORDS, A "MONSTER," "UNHINGED"
AND "UNSTABLE."
TRUMP CONTINUES HIS CAMPAIGN
WITH A RALLY IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
TONIGHT.
CLINTON HAS NO SCHEDULED EVENTS
THIS WEEKEND, BUT STARTS OFF
MONDAY WITH TWO RALLIES IN
FLORIDA.
THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
HAS APPROVED A CONTROVERSIAL
PLAN TO RELEASE GENETICALLY
MODIFIED MOSQUITOES IN THE
FLORIDA KEYS TO FIGHT AGAINST
THE SPREAD OF ZIKA.
UNDER THE PLAN, THE BIOTECH FIRM
OXITECH WOULD RELEASE MALE
MOSQUITOES MODIFIED WITH
SYNTHETIC D.N.A.
THESE MODIFIED MOSQUITOES ARE
THE SAME SPECIES AS THE ONES
SPREADING ZIKA, BUT, WHEN THEY
MATE, THEIR OFFSPRING DIE BEFORE
REACHING ADULTHOOD.
THE GENETICALLY-MODIFIED
MOSQUITOES WILL NOT BE LAUNCHED
UNTIL AFTER THE NOVEMBER
ELECTION, WHEN LOCAL OFFICIALS
WILL HOLD A NON-BINDING VOTE ON
THE PROPOSAL.
16 CASES OF NON-TRAVEL-RELATED
ZIKA INFECTIONS HAVE BEEN
CONFIRMED IN THE MIAMI AREA.
THE PARTY THAT HAS GOVERNED
SOUTH AFRICA SINCE THE END OF
APARTHEID, THE AFRICAN NATIONAL
CONGRESS, HAS SUFFERED ITS WORST
ELECTION RESULTS SINCE TAKING
POWER 22 YEARS AGO.
VOTERS IN TWO KEY URBAN AREAS
TURNED AWAY FROM THE PARTY OF
NELSON MANDELA IN FAVOR OF THE
OPPOSITION DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE
PARTY.
WHILE LEADING THE VOTE
NATIONALLY, THE A.N.C. LOST
MAJORITY CONTROL IN CITIES
INCLUDING THE CAPITAL, PRETORIA,
LARGELY THE RESULT OF WIDESPREAD
ANGER OVER CORRUPTION AND A
STAGNANT ECONOMY.
WITH ALL THE VOTES FROM
WEDNESDAY'S ELECTION NOW
COUNTED, OFFICIALS SAY THE
A.N.C. HAS WON IN JOHANNESBURG,
THE COUNTRY'S LARGEST CITY.
THE PARTY SAYS IT WILL TRY TO
FORM COALITIONS IN THE CITIES
WHERE IT FELL SHORT OF A
MAJORITY.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN BELGIUM SAY
TWO FEMALE POLICE OFFICERS WERE
ATTACKED AND INJURED BY A MAN
WITH A MACHETE OUTSIDE THE
CENTRAL POLICE STATION IN
CHARLEROI, SOUTH OF BRUSSELS.
WITNESSES SAY THE MAN WAS
YELLING "GOD IS GREATEST" IN
ARABIC.
HE WAS SHOT AND KILLED BY A
THIRD POLICE OFFICER.
BOTH INJURED OFFICERS ARE SAID
TO BE OUT OF DANGER.
CHARLEROI IS ALSO THE CITY WHERE
BELGIAN OFFICIALS DISCOVERED A
SAFE HOUSE USED BY THE PLOTTERS
OF THE NOVEMBER PARIS ATTACKS
THAT KILLED 130 PEOPLE.
AN AMERICAN TEENAGER FROM
VIRGINIA HAS WON THE FIRST GOLD
MEDAL AT THE RIO OLYMPICS.
19-YEAR-OLD VIRGINIA THRASHER
DEFEATED CHINA'S DU LI WITH AN
OLYMPIC-RECORD PERFORMANCE IN
THE TEN-METER AIR RIFLE EVENT
TODAY.
THE MEDAL CEREMONY WAS THE FIRST
FOLLOWING LAST NIGHT'S COLORFUL
OPENING CEREMONIES IN A RIO
SOCCER STADIUM, ALL TO THE
RELENTLESS BEAT OF THE BOSSA
NOVA, SAMBA AND FUNK.
BUT, NOT ALL BRAZILIANS ARE ON
BOARD.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
RIO IS DOM PHILLIPS OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST."
DOM, WE'RE NOT GOING TO ASK YOU
SPORTS SCORES.
I KNOW THE "WASHINGTON POST" HAS
A BIG TEAM COVERING THAT, BUT
LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
WHAT ELSE IS HAPPENING OUTSIDE.
FROM THE LOOKS OF IT, THE
OPENING CEREMONIES WENT OFF
WITHOUT ANY MAJOR CALAMITIES, SO
THAT'S A GOOD START.
>> IT IS AND I WONDER IF THE
OPENING CEREMONY MIGHT MARK A
CHANGE IN THE MOOD IN RIO.
THE MOOD BEFORE THE GAMES, AS
YOU'LL KNOW, HAS BEEN
QUITE NEGATIVE FOR A LOT OF
REASONS-- THE FINANCIAL PROBLEMS
IN THE STATE GOVERNMENT, THE
IMPEACHMENT PROCESS, CONCERNS
ABOUT ZIKA AND CONCERNS THAT
PROMISES ON CLEANING UP POLLUTED
WATERS HAVEN'T BEEN MET.
THE RESPONSE TO THE OPENING
CEREMONY WAS HUGELY POSITIVE BY
MANY, MANY BRAZILIANS.
IT MAY HAVE EVEN RESTORED A
LITTLE BIT OF THEIR BRUISED
NATIONAL PRIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT SOME OF THOSE
PROBLEMS.
OBVIOUSLY, SEVERAL OF THE
ATHLETES THAT ARE
COMPETING, ESPECIALLY IN THE
WATER-RELATED EVENTS, ARE
CONCERNED FOR THEIR OWN SAFETY.
THEY ARE CONCERNED FOR THEIR OWN
HEALTH, AS THEY HAVE TO SWIM OR
SAIL ON THESE WATERS.
WHAT IS THE LIKELIHOOD THAT
THERE ARE GOING TO BE ANY
MEASURES TAKEN BETWEEN NOW AND
THE END OF THE GAMES THAT COULD
IMPROVE THAT SITUATION?
>> THERE'S VERY LITTLE THEY CAN
DO TO IMPROVE THE SITUATION.
FOR INSTANCE, WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THE SAILING, THE SAILING
EVENTS, WHICH HAPPEN-- FOUR OF
THE SEVEN RACES ARE IN THE
GUANABARA BAY, THE BEST THEY CAN
DO IS CLEAR UP THE FLOATING
RUBBISH THAT THEY HAVE IN THE
BAY, THE PROBLEM WITH FLOATING
GARBAGE, IT FLOATS IN THE BAY,
AND THEY HAVE A SQUAD OF
ECO-BOATS DOING THAT.
IN TERMS OF THE QUALITY OF THE
WATER, THE BIG PROBLEM THERE IS
THE AMOUNT OF RAW SEWAGE THAT
FLOWS INTO IT, AND THAT RAW
SEWAGE IS COMING FROM A WHOLE
BUNCH OF TOWNS IN THE
METROPOLITAN AREA OF RIO AND
OUTSIDE, THAT DON'T HAVE
SANITATION.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
PUT SEWAGE NETWORKS IN, IN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS.
SO REALLY, THEY'RE CLEANING 50%
OF THE RAW SEWAGE.
THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO GET TO
80%, THEY'RE NOT GOING TO DO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE SECURITY
INFRASTRUCTURE.
I'VE SEEN PHOTOS AND VIDEO.
IT SEEMS THERE ARE ARMED GUARDS
POSTED IN LOTS OF DIFFERENT
PLACES THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
I'M ASSUMING THERE IS SOME
HEIGHTENED ALERTNESS, JUST FOR
THE POSSIBILITIES OF A TERROR
ATTACK, POSSIBILITIES OF
ANYTHING GOING WRONG.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
WHAT YOU SEE IS A VERY, VERY
OBVIOUS, LARGE MILITARY PRESENCE
THROUGHOUT RIO ON STREETS, ON
MAIN HIGHWAYS, METRO STATIONS.
YOU'LL SEE ARMED SOLDIERS
STANDING AROUND OUTSIDE THE
ATHLETES' VILLAGE, ALONG THE
BEACH.
YOU'LL SEE SOLDIERS EVERYWHERE.
ONE REASON BEING THERE'S BEEN
RISING VIOLENT CRIME IN RIO IN
THE LAST FEW MONTHS, AND ANOTHER
BEING THAT A GOVERNMENT POLICY
TO PACIFY FAVELLAS-- LOW-INCOME
COMMUNITIES-- WHICH FOR YEARS
HAVE BEEN DOMINATED BY DRUG
GANGS, HAS BEEN SORT OF
CRUMBLING.
SO AT THE ENTRANCE OF THESE
FAVELLAS YOU WILL SEE THERE ARE
SOLDIERS STATIONED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ECONOMY WAS
SUPPOSED TO GET A BIG SHOT IN
THE ARM WITH ALL THE NEW MONEY,
THE NEW INVESTMENT, THE NEW
TOURISTS COMING IN.
WHAT YOU HAVE SEEN ON THE
GROUND?
>> ECONOMY IS STRUGGLING, HAS
BEEN STRUGGLING FOR A LONG TIME,
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE LOST
THEIR JOBS.
AND WHETHER THERE HAS BEEN A BIG
SORT OF INPUT FROM THE OLYMPIC
GAMES, THERE'S PROBABLY BEEN
SOME IN RIO, AND WHAT WE ARE
HEARING RECENTLY FROM ECONOMISTS
IS THE ECONOMY IS BEGINNING TO
SHOW SOME SIGNS OF A RECOVERY.
BUT THAT'S GOING TO BE-- THERE'S
A COUNTER-BALANCE TO THAT WHICH
IS GOING TO BE, AS SOON AS THE
GAMES ARE OVER, A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO BE MADE UNEMPLOYED.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, DOM
PHILLIPS FROM THE "WASHINGTON
POST" JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
RIO, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> OKAY.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN ABOUT A
SUBURB IN THE FLORIDA KEYS THAT
HAS BECOME A TESTING GROUND IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST THE ZIKA VIRUS
THROUGH THE USE OF GENETICALLY-
MODIFIED MOSQUITOES.
VISIT US AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE TURN TO FLORIDA, WHERE ONE OF
THE NATION'S LARGEST WATERWAYS
IS IN PERIL.
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT LISA DESAI AND
PRODUCER YASMEEN QURESHI
TRAVELED TO THE INDIAN RIVER
LAGOON ON FLORIDA'S EAST COAST
TO LOOK AT THE IMPACT THAT
SEPTIC TANKS ARE HAVING ON ITS
FRAGILE ECOSYSTEM.
THIS STORY WAS SUPPORTED BY THE
FLORIDA CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING, THE INVESTIGATIVE
FUND AT THE NATION INSTITUTE AND
THE ECONOMIC HARDSHIP REPORTING
PROJECT.
>> Reporter: THE INDIAN RIVER
LAGOON STRETCHES FOR 156 MILES
ALONG FLORIDA'S EAST COAST.
THE ESTUARY, WHERE THE RIVER
MEETS THE SEA, IS HOME TO
THOUSANDS OF SPECIES OF PLANTS
AND ANIMALS, AND SCIENTISTS
CONSIDER IT ONE OF THE MOST
BIO-DIVERSE WATERWAYS IN NORTH
AMERICA.
BUT, AS BEAUTIFUL AS IT LOOKS,
THIS ECOSYSTEM NOW STRUGGLES TO
SURVIVE.
BRIAN LAPOINTE IS A SCIENTIST AT
FLORIDA ATLANTIC UNIVERSITY'S
HARBOR BRANCH OCEANOGRAPHIC
INSTITUTE.
>> WE'RE HAVING A CRISIS IN THE
INDIAN RIVER LAGOON FROM
EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS OF NUTRIENTS
LIKE NITROGEN AND PHOSPHORUS
THAT ARE CAUSING HARMFUL ALGAL
BLOOMS.
SOME OF THESE ARE TOXIC, AND
SOME ARE NOT TOXIC BUT STILL
CAUSE ECOLOGICAL DAMAGE.
>> Reporter: THOSE NUTRIENTS IN
THE WATER COME FROM SEWAGE AND
FERTILIZERS AND CAN SPUR ALGAL
BLOOMS-- WHEN ALGAE GROWS OUT OF
CONTROL, BLOCKING SUNLIGHT AND
STARVING THE WATER OF OXYGEN.
THE BLOOMS DESTROYED OVER HALF
THE SEAGRASS IN THE LAGOON
DURING THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
IN MARCH OF THIS YEAR, THEY
CAUSED ONE OF THE BIGGEST FISH
KILLS IN THE ESTUARY'S HISTORY.
>> IT KILLED MILLIONS OF FISH
BUT ALSO JUST-- IT CAUSED DIE-
OFF OF A LOT OF THE BIOLOGICAL
DIVERSITY THAT WE HAVE IN THE
LAGOON.
>> Reporter: IN MAY, THE
ST. LUCIE RIVER, WHICH IS PART
OF THE INDIAN RIVER LAGOON,
BECAME SO POLLUTED THAT THE
FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
WARNED RESIDENTS NOT TO TOUCH
THE WATER.
THIS TOXIC BLUE-GREEN ALGAE
SMOTHERED PARTS OF THE RIVER,
SUFFOCATING ENDANGERED MANATEES.
>> TRYING TO BREATHE IN THAT.
THAT IS SO HORRENDOUS.
>> Reporter: PICTURES AND VIDEOS
OF THE CONTAMINATION ARE ALL
OVER SOCIAL MEDIA.
IN THIS ONE, A MANATEE SWIMS
THROUGH THE THICK SLUDGE,
DESPERATE FOR RELIEF, AS GOOD
SAMARITANS HOSE IT DOWN WITH
FRESH WATER.
>> OH, THAT'S IT, BUDDY.
>> Reporter: SCIENTISTS SAY THE
RIVER IS HEAVILY POLLUTED BY
WATER RELEASED FROM NEARBY LAKE
OKEECHOBEE, WHICH IS DRAINED
REGULARLY TO PREVENT FLOODING.
THE DRAINAGE DUMPS EXCESS ALGAE
AND AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER
RUNOFF INTO THE RIVER.
LAST MONTH, OFFICIALS CURTAILED
THE DISCHARGES TO HELP KEEP THE
TOXIC ALGAE UNDER CONTROL.
HOWEVER, THE WATER FROM LAKE
OKEECHOBEE ISN'T THE ONLY
CULPRIT.
>> WE HAVE TWO MAJOR PROBLEMS--
THAT DISCHARGE FROM THE LAKE
BRINGING A LOT OF FRESHWATER
INTO THE SYSTEM, AND THEN ALL
THE SEPTIC TANKS THAT ARE ALSO
DRAINING INTO THE SYSTEM WITH
FECAL COLIFORM BACTERIA.
AND IT REALLY IS LIKE THE
PERFECT STORM COMING TOGETHER,
CREATING A BIG, BIG PROBLEM IN
THIS AREA.
>> Reporter: IN THE LAST 60
YEARS, THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
LIVING IN THE FIVE COUNTIES
AROUND THE LAGOON HAS DOUBLED.
MANY OF THEIR HOMES USE SEPTIC
TANKS TO TREAT SEWAGE, AND
LAPOINTE SAYS THAT'S A BIG PART
OF THE PROBLEM.
>> THE PROBLEM IS, SEPTIC TANKS
REALLY DON'T TREAT THE SEWAGE TO
A VERY HIGH LEVEL.
THEY ARE NOT ENGINEERED TO
REMOVE NUTRIENTS, AND THEY DON'T
DISINFECT.
SO, TODAY, WE HAVE UPWARDS OF
600,000 SEPTIC TANKS LEACHING
INTO TIDAL CREEKS AND CANALS
THAT FLOW INTO THE INDIAN RIVER
LAGOON.
>> Reporter: LAPOINTE AND HIS
TEAM REGULARLY TEST THE WATER.
HE SAYS TRACES OF HUMAN
POLLUTION FROM SEPTIC TANKS ARE
EVERYWHERE: ARTIFICIAL
SWEETENERS; ACETAMINOPHEN, THE
ACTIVE INGREDIENT IN TYLENOL;
AND FECAL MATTER.
THERE ARE 800 TO 1,000 DOLPHINS
LIVING IN THE LAGOON AT ANY
GIVEN TIME.
MANY ARE INFECTED WITH E. COLI
AND ANTIBIOTIC-RESISTANT
BACTERIA COMMONLY FOUND IN HUMAN
SEWAGE FROM SEPTIC TANKS.
THE ONCE-CLEAR, SANDY BOTTOM OF
THE WATER IS NOW FULL OF DEAD
ALGAE.
>> YOU CAN SEE THE OTHER THING
THAT HAPPENS, OF COURSE, FROM
THE SEPTIC TANKS IS THE BUILD-UP
OF MUCK OVER TIME.
AS THE ALGAE BLOOMS AND DIES, IT
FORMS THIS BLACK MUCK.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,
MORE THAN ONE IN FIVE HOMES IN
THE UNITED STATES RELIES ON
SEPTIC TANKS TO TREAT THEIR
SEWAGE.
THE TANKS WORK BEST IN RURAL
AREAS WITH DENSE SOIL AND WHERE
HOMES ARE SPREAD OUT.
THE TANKS ARE INSTALLED
UNDERGROUND AND RECEIVE WASTE
FROM BATHROOMS, KITCHENS AND
LAUNDRY MACHINES.
INSIDE THE TANK, SOLID WASTE IS
SEPARATED FROM LIQUID WASTE.
THE LIQUID THEN FLOWS INTO THE
GROUND.
IF THE SOIL IS DENSE ENOUGH, IT
CAN FILTER OUT BACTERIA AND
VIRUSES, NATURALLY CLEANING THE
WASTEWATER BEFORE IT REACHES A
DRINKING SUPPLY OR BODY OF
WATER.
>> ONE SEPTIC TANK BY ITSELF
ISN'T A PROBLEM, BUT WHEN YOU
HAVE HIGH DENSITIES OF SEPTIC
TANKS-- THOUSANDS, OR, IN SOME
CASES, TENS OF THOUSANDS-- IN
POOR SOIL CONDITIONS, CLOSE TO A
SENSITIVE WATER BODY LIKE THE
INDIAN RIVER LAGOON, THEN YOU'VE
GOT A BIG PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: IN AREAS LIKE CAPE
COD, MASSACHUSETTS, AND LONG
ISLAND, NEW YORK, SCIENTISTS ARE
ALSO SEEING INCREASED ALGAL
BLOOMS.
LAST YEAR ON THE EAST END OF
LONG ISLAND, DARK PATCHES OF
ALGAL BLOOMS SPURRED OUT OF
CONTROL, KILLING HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF FISH IN THE PECONIC
RIVER ESTUARY.
SCIENTISTS SAID THAT THE 360,000
SEPTIC TANKS NEAR THE WATER
CONTRIBUTED TO THE PROBLEM.
LAPOINTE BELIEVES THERE SHOULD
BE STRONGER GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT
WHERE SEPTIC TANKS ARE BUILT.
>> PEOPLE, THEY GET THEIR
PERMITS LEGALLY PERMITTED BY THE
STATE AGENCIES AND THE HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS.
THEY THINK IT'S WORKING JUST
FINE.
IT'S LIKE THIS MAGIC BOX
UNDERGROUND.
>> Reporter: THREE YEARS AGO,
BETHANY AND SEAN QUINN MOVED
INTO THEIR HOME JUST ACROSS THE
STREET FROM THE ST. LUCIE RIVER.
IT'S THE SAME HOUSE BETHANY GREW
UP IN.
THEY NOW THINK THAT PART OF
WHAT'S HURTING THE WATERWAY IS
THE SEPTIC TANK BURIED IN THE
FRONT YARD.
THEIRS IS ONE OF 30,000 SEPTIC
TANKS IN FLORIDA'S MARTIN COUNTY
SUSPECTED OF SEEPING INTO THE
WATER.
>> IF I HAD MY PREFERENCE, I'D
MUCH RATHER HAVE IT BE SOMETHING
THAT GOES AND IS TREATED, AND
THE WATER'S RECLAIMED AND, YOU
KNOW, GETS TURNED INTO SOMETHING
USEFUL.
>> Reporter: THE QUINNS SAY THE
WATER ISN'T AS HEALTHY AS IT
USED TO BE.
THEY DON'T SWIM IN IT ANYMORE,
AND THEY WON'T LET THEIR TWO
DAUGHTERS GO NEAR IT.
>> NOW, PEOPLE AREN'T CATCHING
AS MUCH FISH.
YOU DON'T SEE ANY OF THE
SEAGRASS.
YOU RARELY SEE SHELLS.
I MEAN, IT'S JUST, YOU KNOW,
IT'S CHANGING RIGHT BEFORE OUR
EYES, IN OUR GENERATION, THAT
WE'VE SEEN.
>> I... I DON'T SEE HOW IT CAN
COME BACK.
BUT ENOUGH ATTENTION, AND MAYBE
WE'LL BE SUCCESSFUL.
>> Reporter: ONE COUNTY TRYING
TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT IS
MARTIN COUNTY.
COMMISSIONER DOUG SMITH IS
SPEARHEADING A $138 MILLION
PROJECT TO CLEAN UP THE RIVER.
THE PLAN OVER THE NEXT 20 YEARS
IS TO CONNECT OVER 10,000 HOUSES
THAT RELY ON SEPTIC TANKS TO
SEWAGE LINES.
SO, THIS IS GROUND WATER, RIGHT
HERE?
>> YES, SO HERE'S THE CHALLENGE.
>> Reporter: ON THE SIDE OF A
ROAD A QUARTER MILE FROM THE
RIVER, SMITH SAYS THIS PUDDLE OF
GROUNDWATER IS A SIGN OF WHY
SEPTIC TANKS DON'T BELONG IN
THESE KIND OF NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> THE GROUNDWATER IS RIGHT
THERE, AND YOU'RE ONLY 2-3 FEET
BELOW THE SURFACE LEVEL OF WHERE
WE ARE STANDING.
AND SO, ALL OF THESE HOMES HAVE
BOTH THEIR SEPTIC SYSTEMS AND
THEIR DRAINFIELDS SITTING RIGHT
ON TOP OF THAT.
>> Reporter: WHY WERE DEVELOPERS
ALLOWED TO BUILD SO MANY SEPTIC
TANKS CLOSE TO THE SHORELINE?
>> THE DEVELOPMENT
COMMUNITY, FOR A LONG TIME, IT
WAS A LOT ABOUT "HOW CAN WE GET
THE MOST UNITS BUILT AS QUICKLY
AS POSSIBLE?"
TIME HAS MOVED ON.
THERE'S A LOT MORE AWARENESS,
THERE'S A LOT MORE CONSCIOUSNESS
NOW AS TO HOW WE DEAL WITH LIFE.
IT'S NOT... IT'S NOT PROPER TO
HAVE A SEPTIC SYSTEM ON THE EDGE
OF A WATER BODY ANYWHERE IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Reporter: WITH A GOAL OF
HAVING HOMEOWNERS CONVERT FROM
SEPTIC TANKS TO SEWER SYSTEMS
OVER THE NEXT 20 YEARS, MANY
MARTIN COUNTY RESIDENTS WILL BE
MANDATED TO REPLACE THEIR SEPTIC
TANKS AND PAY AROUND $8,500 PER
HOUSEHOLD TO CONNECT TO SEWAGE
LINES.
PEOPLE WHO CAN'T PAY UP FRONT
WILL BE ALLOWED TO PAY IN
INSTALLMENTS OVER 20 YEARS,
ADDED ONTO THEIR PROPERTY TAXES.
AND JUST LAST MONTH, FLORIDA
GOVERNOR RICK SCOTT CALLED
SEPTIC TANK RUN-OFF A "MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR TO THE POLLUTION IN
THESE WATER BODIES."
HE ALSO SAID HE WOULD PROPOSE
NEW FUNDING FOR A 50/50 MATCHING
GRANT "TO ENCOURAGE RESIDENTS TO
MOVE FROM SEPTIC TANKS TO SEWER
SYSTEMS IN ORDER TO CURB
POLLUTION" AND "TO MEET THE
INCREASED DEMAND FOR WASTEWATER
SERVICES."
>> PEOPLE WANT TO HAVE GOOD,
HEALTHY WATER.
THEY WANT IT TO BE CLEAN WATER,
AND IT REALLY SHOULD BE.
GENERATIONS AGO, IT WAS.
AND SO, EVERYBODY'S HOPE IS THAT
WE CAN GET BACK TO THAT.
>> Reporter: SUZIE DEBARTOLO IS
ONE HOMEOWNER WHO WAS ELIGIBLE
TO CONNECT TO SEWER LINES.
SHE SIGNED UP RIGHT AWAY AND
PAID THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS TO GET
RID OF HER SEPTIC TANK.
>> I WAS SO EXCITED TO DO IT, I
STARTED SAVING IN ADVANCE FOR
THIS.
AND IT WAS JUST LIKE NIGHT AND
DAY.
I'VE NEVER HAD ANOTHER WORRY OR
CONCERN SINCE, AND EVERYTHING
WORKS PERFECTLY.
>> Reporter: DEBARTOLO MOVED TO
MARTIN COUNTY 40 YEARS AGO, TO
THIS HOUSE OVERLOOKING THE ST.
LUCIE RIVER.
BUT SHE HAS SOLD HER BOAT, AND
HER KAYAKS ARE STORED AWAY.
>> OKAY, LISA, YOU SEE HOW THAT
IS JUST TOTALLY DEAD?
YOU DON'T SEE ANY SIGN OF LIFE
DOWN THERE.
I WOULDN'T DARE GET IN HERE.
>> Reporter: DEBARTOLO SAYS SHE
MISSES THE FLOURISHING LAGOON,
AND LIFE IN HER NEIGHBORHOOD
ISN'T THE SAME.
>> IT'S JUST A VERY SAD REALITY.
LIFE CHANGES AND I'M HOPEFUL
THAT SOMETHING CAN BE DONE TO
IMPROVE IT WHERE WE COULD GET
BACK OUT ON THE WATER.
>> Sreenivasan: ACCORDING TO THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION, OVERDOSE DEATHS
INVOLVING PRESCRIPTION OPIOIDS
HAVE QUADRUPLED SINCE 1999, AS
HAVE THE SALES OF SUCH DRUGS.
IN 2014 ALONE, MORE THAN 14,000
PEOPLE DIED FROM OVERDOSES
INVOLVING DRUGS SUCH AS
METHADONE, OXYCODONE AND
HYDROCODONE.
AND TODAY, AT LEAST HALF OF ALL
OVERDOSE DEATHS INVOLVE A
PRESCRIPTION OPIOID.
THERE IS ANOTHER DRUG IN THAT
GROUP THAT MAY BE LESSER-KNOWN
BUT PERHAPS EVEN MORE LETHAL.
IT'S CALLED FENTANYL, AND
JOINING ME NOW FROM BOSTON TO
DISCUSS THE GROWING CONCERNS
OVER ITS IMPACT IS DAVID
ARMSTRONG OF THE SCIENCE AND
HEALTH REPORTING NEWS OUTLET
STAT.
DAVID, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PUT FENTANYL IN PERSPECTIVE FOR
US.
REALLY, SINCE THE DEATH OF
PRINCE, THAT WORD HAS KIND OF
CREPT INTO PEOPLE'S PSYCHE, BUT
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THIS DRUG
WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THESE
OVERDOSES?
>> WELL, IT'S SIGNIFICANT
BECAUSE-- TWO MAIN REASONS.
ONE IS ITS POTENCY.
FENTANYL IS ANYWHERE FROM 50 TO
100 TIMES MORE POWERFUL, MORE
POTENT THAN HEROIN, WHICH IS
ALREADY MORE POTENT AND POWERFUL
THAN OTHER OPIODS PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN ABUSING.
AND THE OTHER THING THAT'S
FRIGHTENING ABOUT FENTANYL IS
THAT IT IS BEING MISLABELED OR
COUNTERFEITED, IN ESSENCE, AS
OTHER OPIODS.
SO PEOPLE THINK THEY'RE TAKING
HEROIN.
THEY'RE ACTUALLY TAKING
FENTANYL.
AND, ALSO, WE'RE NOW SEEING A
BIG INCREASE IN FENTANYL BEING
LABELED AS PAIN KILLERS, YOU
KNOW, REGULAR PRESCRIPTION PAIN
PILLS THAT PEOPLE BUY ON THE
STREETS THAT'S ACTUALLY
FENTANYL.
SO THAT'S WHERE THE DANGER COMES
IN, THOSE TWO THINGS-- THE
POTENCY AND THE FACT THAT A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE ARE UNAWARE
THAT THEY'RE TAKING THIS DRUG.
>> Sreenivasan: HELP US
UNDERSTAND, ON THE SORT OF
ARSENAL OF PAIN KILLERS, WHERE
DOES FENTANYL STACK UP?
>> I MEAN, IT'S REALLY AT THE
TOP OF THE HEAP.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FENTANYL
AND HEROIN, FOR INSTANCE, IS
FENTANYL IS A SYNTHETIC.
IT'S MADE IN A LABORATORY, AND
IT'S MADE IN A WAY THAT IS SO
MUCH MORE POTENT THAN HEROIN,
THAT PEOPLE REALLY DON'T
UNDERSTAND OR COMPREHEND IT ON
THE STREET.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, SO
IF IT'S MADE IN A LAB, AREN'T
THERE WAYS TO RESTRICT THE
IN-FLOW OF THE LABS THAT ARE
PRODUCING IT AND HOW IT GETS ON
TO THE STREETS?
>> WELL, OBVIOUSLY, NOT SO FAR,
BECAUSE IT'S FLOODING THE
MARKETPLACE IN THIS COUNTRY.
A PRIMARY SOURCE OF FENTANYL IS
CHINA, AND SO FAR, THE EFFORTS
BY THE D.E.A. AND CUSTOMS AND
OTHER AGENCIES HAVE BEEN REALLY
FUTILE IN TRYING TO SLOW THE
ARRIVAL OF THIS DRUG HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE STREET
ECONOMICS OF THE VALUE OF THIS
DRUG-- BASIC ECONOMICS, AS THE
SUPPLY INCREASES OF SOMETHING,
THE PRICE WOULD GO DOWN.
THE SUPPLY OF, SAY, LOT OF PAIN
KILLERS ON THE MARKET.
SO HOW IS IT THAT FENTANYL IS
MAKING THESE INROADS?
>> SO, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A
FACTOR OF 10, 15, 20 TIMES MORE
PROFITABLE FOR A DRUG DEALER TO
USE FENTANYL, WHETHER IT'S, YOU
KNOW, SOLD AS HEROIN, CUT INTO
HEROIN, OR SOLD AS A
PRESCRIPTION PAIN KILLER, THAN
THOSE ACTUAL PRODUCTS.
AND THE HIGH THAT IT PROVIDES IS
ON PAR WITH HEROIN OR EVEN
BETTER.
SO IT'S REALLY THESE TWO THINGS
COMING TOGETHER THAT HAVE
HELPED TO CAUSE THE EXPLOSION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IS THIS
EXPLOSION UNIFORM ACROSS THE
COUNTRY?
ARE THERE POCKETS?
>> THE HEAVIEST POCKETS SO
FAR HAVE BEEN THE NORTHEAST,
THROUGHOUT THE MIDWEST.
OHIO HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY HARD
HIT.
SINCE THE 4th OF JULY IN
AKRON, THERE HAVE BEEN NEARLY
300 OVERDOSES AND TWO DOZEN
DEATHS THAT THE POLICE THERE
BELIEVE IS LINKED TO A FORM OF
FENTANYL CALLED CAR FENTANYL.
AND THE LEGAL USE OF
CAR FENTANYL IS TO SEDATE
ELEPHANTS.
YESTERDAY, IN LAFAYETTE,
LOUISIANA, THE POLICE THERE
WARNED OF A HUGE INCREASE IN
DEATHS FROM FENTANYL.
CALIFORNIA, FLORIDA-- IT'S
EVERYWHERE NOW.
IT'S EXPANDING, AND AT A RAPID
PACE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DAVID ARMSTRONG FROM NEWS SITE
STAT, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE 2008
SUMMER OLYMPICS IN BEIJING,
CHINA, THE HOME TEAM LED ALL
COUNTRIES WITH 51 GOLD MEDALS, A
MEASURE OF SUCCESS THEY HOPE TO
REPEAT OVER THE NEXT TWO WEEKS
IN RIO.
AND AS I.T.N. CORRESPONDENT DEBI
EDWARD REPORTS, THE DIFFICULT
PATH TO MAKING THE TEAM CAN
BEGIN AS EARLY AS AGE FOUR.
>> FOR UP TO TEN HOURS A DAY,
THESE YOUNG GIRLS AND BOYS ARE
PUT THROUGH REGIMENTED TRAINING
ROUTINES THAT ARE DESIGNED TO
MAKE THEM OLYMPIC CHAMPIONS.
(WHISTLE)
MANY HAVE BEEN PLUCKED FROM
RURAL VILLAGES, MOVING AWAY FROM
THEIR FAMILY.
OTHERS HAVE THEIR PROGRESS
WATCHED BY EAGER PARENTS,
WILLING THEIR CHILD TO SUCCEED.
>> (translated): IT'S GOOD
FOR HER BODY BEAUTY.
SHE STARTED FROM NURSERY SCHOOL
AND HAS BEEN TRAINING FOR FOUR
YEARS NOW.
>> Reporter: CHINA HAS
REJECTED CRITICISM OF ITS
INTENSE COACHING METHODS.
THESE KIND OF TECHNIQUES HAVE
BEEN CONDEMNED AS ARCHAIC AND
CRUEL.
THERE ARE ALMOST HALF A MILLION
CHINESE CHILDREN BEING TRAINED
IN THESE ELITE ACADEMIES, AND
ONLY 10% WILL EVER MAKE IT TO
NATIONAL OR OLYMPIC LEVEL.
JIANG SHANGWU WAS ONCE BOUND FOR
THE OLYMPICS.
NOW HE'S HOMELESS AND SELLS
BRACELETS IN THE BEIJING SUBWAY.
>> (translated): I WAS
RECRUITED WHEN I WAS SIX YEARS
OLD AND TRAINED LIKE A
PROFESSIONAL.
I HAVE NO EDUCATION, NO JOB
SKILLS.
WE SHOULD BE TREATED LIKE THOSE
LEAVING THE ARMY AND GET SOME
SORT OF SUPPORT.
>> Reporter: CHINA HAS
THOUSANDS OF FORMER ATHLETES
LIKE JIANG COPING WITH A
SHATTERED OLYMPIC DREAM.
BUT, STILL, EVERY YEAR, HUNDREDS
MORE ENTER A SCHOOLING SYSTEM
WHERE ONLY GOLD IS GOOD ENOUGH.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
DEATH OF PETE FOUNTAIN, THE
CLARINETIST WHO STARTED PLAYING
PROFESSIONALLY ON NEW ORLEANS'
BOURBON STREET AS A TEENAGER,
AND NEVER REALLY LEFT, BECOMING
A MARDI GRAS FIXTURE AND EVEN
OWNING A CLUB THERE FOR MANY
YEARS.
FOUNTAIN APPEARED ON THE JOHNNY
CARSON TELEVISION SHOW ALMOST 60
TIMES, AND PLAYED AT THE WHITE
HOUSE FOUR TIMES, BUT HE ALWAYS
RETURNED TO HIS MUSICAL ROOTS IN
NEW ORLEANS.
PETE FOUNTAIN DIED TODAY.
HE WAS 86.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.